[docs][widgets] Expand widgets docs and add missing APIs (#47188)
expo/expo: docs/pages/versions/unversioned/sdk/widgets.mdx

    {
      name: 'widgets[].name',
      description:

>         'The internal name (identifier) of the widget. This is used as the Swift struct name and should be a valid Swift identifier (no spaces or special characters). It must match the `name` passed to `createWidget` or `createLiveActivity`.',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        'The internal name (identifier) of the widget. This is used as the Swift struct name and should be a valid Swift identifier (no spaces or special characters). It must match the `name` passed to `createWidget`.',
```

## Usage

### The `'widget'` directive

> Components passed to `createWidget` and `createLiveActivity` must start with the `'widget'` directive. The directive tells the bundler to compile that component into a separate JavaScript bundle that runs in an isolated runtime inside the widget extension — not in your app's React Native runtime.

Reviewer 2: **[nit]** The style guide prefers separate sentences (or a comma) over em dashes for phrase splitting (`style-guide.md#punctuation`). A comma reads cleanly for this "X, not Y" contrast.

```suggestion
Components passed to `createWidget` and `createLiveActivity` must start with the `'widget'` directive. The directive tells the bundler to compile that component into a separate JavaScript bundle that runs in an isolated runtime inside the widget extension, not in your app's React Native runtime.
```

Because of this isolation, code inside a `'widget'`-marked component is limited:

- It can only render [`@expo/ui/swift-ui`](/versions/latest/sdk/ui/swift-ui/) components and modifiers. Standard React Native components (such as `View` and `Text` from `react-native`) are not available.
- It cannot use React hooks (`useState`, `useEffect`, and others), component state, or context. The function must be pure and return its layout synchronously.
- It cannot perform asynchronous work, import other modules, or access your app's runtime or in-memory state.

> - It cannot reference anything declared outside the component function — including plain top-level `const`s in the **same file**. The bundler serializes only the function body, so module-scope values are not present at runtime. Declare every constant and helper **inside** the widget function, or pass it in through props.

Reviewer 2: **[nit]** Prefer a comma over an em dash for this aside (`style-guide.md#punctuation`).

```suggestion
- It cannot reference anything declared outside the component function, including plain top-level `const`s in the **same file**. The bundler serializes only the function body, so module-scope values are not present at runtime. Declare every constant and helper **inside** the widget function, or pass it in through props.
```

});
```

#### Adapting to the rendering environment

Beyond `widgetFamily` and `date`, the `environment` object describes how and where the system is drawing the widget so you can adapt the layout:

- `colorScheme` — `'light'` or `'dark'`.
- `widgetRenderingMode` — `'fullColor'` for home screen widgets, `'vibrant'` for Lock Screen widgets (the system desaturates them into an adaptive monochrome look), and `'accented'` for tinted widgets on iOS 18 and later. Use this to choose colors that read well in each mode.
- `isLuminanceReduced` — `true` when the display requires reduced brightness (such as Always-On). Lower the overall brightness of your content, for example by using stroked rather than filled shapes.
- `widgetContentMargins` — the system-suggested margins (`top`, `bottom`, `leading`, `trailing`) when content margins are not disabled.

> - `showsWidgetLabel` — for accessory widgets, whether an accessory label can be displayed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `colorScheme`: `'light'` or `'dark'`.
- `widgetRenderingMode`: `'fullColor'` for home screen widgets, `'vibrant'` for Lock Screen widgets (the system desaturates them into an adaptive monochrome look), and `'accented'` for tinted widgets on iOS 18 and later. Use this to choose colors that read well in each mode.
- `isLuminanceReduced`: `true` when the display requires reduced brightness (such as Always-On). Lower the overall brightness of your content, for example by using stroked rather than filled shapes.
- `widgetContentMargins`: The system-suggested margins (`top`, `bottom`, `leading`, `trailing`) when content margins are not disabled.
- `showsWidgetLabel`: For accessory widgets, whether an accessory label can be displayed.
```

For consistency with the rest of the docs.

#### Interactive widgets

> Widgets can include interactive controls such as `Button`. The value a button's `onPress` callback returns becomes the widget's new props — the runtime persists it and reloads the widget on device, with no running app process required. This is the primary way to make a widget update itself in response to a tap. Interactive widgets require iOS 17 or later.

Reviewer 2: **[nit]** Prefer two sentences over an em dash here (`style-guide.md#punctuation`).

```suggestion
Widgets can include interactive controls such as `Button`. The value a button's `onPress` callback returns becomes the widget's new props. The runtime persists it and reloads the widget on device, with no running app process required. This is the primary way to make a widget update itself in response to a tap. Interactive widgets require iOS 17 or later.
```

```tsx CounterWidget.tsx
import { Button, Text, VStack } from '@expo/ui/swift-ui';
import { createWidget } from 'expo-widgets';

type CounterProps = {
  count: number;
};

const CounterWidget = (props: CounterProps) => {
  'widget';
  return (
    <VStack>
      <Text>Count: {props.count}</Text>
      <Button label="Increment" target="increment" onPress={() => ({ count: props.count + 1 })} />
    </VStack>
  );
};

export default createWidget('CounterWidget', CounterWidget, { count: 0 });
```

> To also keep your running app in sync with widget interactions, give the control a `target` identifier (as above) and listen for taps with `addUserInteractionListener`. The listener receives the widget's `name` as `source` and the control's `target`. Unlike `onPress`, it only fires while the app process is alive, so use it to mirror interactions into app state — not as the widget's update mechanism.

Reviewer 2: **[nit]** Prefer a comma over an em dash for this "X, not Y" contrast (`style-guide.md#punctuation`).

```suggestion
To also keep your running app in sync with widget interactions, give the control a `target` identifier (as above) and listen for taps with `addUserInteractionListener`. The listener receives the widget's `name` as `source` and the control's `target`. Unlike `onPress`, it only fires while the app process is alive, so use it to mirror interactions into app state, not as the widget's update mechanism.
```

```

> **info** `widgetsDirectory` is `null` when no app group is configured. The `groupIdentifier` config plugin option sets up the app group automatically.

#### Configurable widgets

When you add an [`ios.configuration`](#configuration-in-app-config) to a widget, users can long-press the widget and edit its parameters. The values they choose are delivered to your widget through `environment.configuration`. Type the configuration by passing a second type argument to `createWidget` (and `WidgetEnvironment`). Configurable widgets require iOS 17 or later.

```tsx
import { Text, VStack } from '@expo/ui/swift-ui';
import { createWidget, type WidgetEnvironment } from 'expo-widgets';

type WeatherProps = {
  temperature: number;
};

type WeatherConfiguration = {
  city: string;
};

const WeatherWidget = (
  props: WeatherProps,
  environment: WidgetEnvironment<WeatherConfiguration>
) => {
  'widget';
  return (
    <VStack>
      <Text>{environment.configuration.city}</Text>
      <Text>{props.temperature}°</Text>
    </VStack>
  );
};

export default createWidget<WeatherProps, WeatherConfiguration>('WeatherWidget', WeatherWidget);
```

### Live Activities

> Live Activities display real-time information on the Lock Screen and in the Dynamic Island on supported devices. They require iOS 16.2 or later.

Reviewer: iOS 16.4 is the minimum version for all Expo projects in SDK 56.
```suggestion
Live Activities display real-time information on the Lock Screen and in the Dynamic Island on supported devices.
```

#### Prerequisite: Creating a Live Activity

Live Activity layouts must be created once using `createLiveActivity` and marked with the `'widget'` directive. The component receives your props as the first argument and a `LiveActivityEnvironment` object as the second. It returns an object describing the layout for each presentation: the Lock Screen `banner`, the compact and minimal Dynamic Island states, and the expanded Dynamic Island regions.

> > **important** `createLiveActivity` registers a Live Activity entirely at runtime, and the library's built-in Live Activity target renders it. Do **not** add a `widgets[]` entry for it in the [app config](#configuration-in-app-config) — `widgets[]` is only for home screen and Lock Screen widgets, and an entry without `supportedFamilies` generates an invalid widget target that fails to build. The `name` you pass to `createLiveActivity` only has to match this `createLiveActivity` call, not an app-config widget.

Reviewer 2: **[nit]** Prefer separate sentences over an em dash (`style-guide.md#punctuation`). This keeps the callout a single paragraph and avoids leading the next clause with bare `widgets[]`.

```suggestion
> **important** `createLiveActivity` registers a Live Activity entirely at runtime, and the library's built-in Live Activity target renders it. Do **not** add a `widgets[]` entry for it in the [app config](#configuration-in-app-config). The `widgets[]` array is only for home screen and Lock Screen widgets, and an entry without `supportedFamilies` generates an invalid widget target that fails to build. The `name` you pass to `createLiveActivity` only has to match this `createLiveActivity` call, not an app-config widget.
```

export default createLiveActivity('DeliveryActivity', DeliveryActivity);
```

The layout object supports these regions:

- `banner` — the main Lock Screen presentation.
- `bannerSmall` — a compact Lock Screen presentation used on CarPlay and watchOS. Falls back to `banner` when omitted.
- `compactLeading`, `compactTrailing`, `minimal` — the compact and minimal Dynamic Island states.

> - `expandedLeading`, `expandedTrailing`, `expandedCenter`, `expandedBottom` — the regions of the expanded Dynamic Island.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `banner`: The main Lock Screen presentation.
- `bannerSmall`: A compact Lock Screen presentation used on CarPlay and watchOS. Falls back to `banner` when omitted.
- `compactLeading`, `compactTrailing`, `minimal`: The compact and minimal Dynamic Island states.
- `expandedLeading`, `expandedTrailing`, `expandedCenter`, `expandedBottom`: The regions of the expanded Dynamic Island.
```

The `environment` object also exposes `isLuminanceReduced`, `isActivityFullscreen`, `isActivityUpdateReduced`, and `activityFamily` so you can adapt the layout to the current presentation.

#### Starting a Live Activity

> The example below continues from [Creating Live Activity](#prerequisite-creating-live-activity).

Reviewer 2: **[critical]** This link points to `#prerequisite-creating-live-activity`, but this PR renamed the heading to "Prerequisite: Creating a Live Activity", whose auto-generated anchor is now `#prerequisite-creating-a-live-activity`. The old anchor no longer exists, so this in-page link is broken. The link text is also missing the article "a", unlike the widget links you updated on lines 266 and 279. (`style-guide.md#expo-specific-gotchas`)

```suggestion
The example below continues from [Creating a Live Activity](#prerequisite-creating-a-live-activity).
```

pushToStartSubscription.remove();
```

> Send the token to your server and use it to push updates. The notification must use the `liveactivity` push type (the `apns-push-type` header), an `apns-topic` of `<your bundle identifier>.push-type.liveactivity`, and a payload whose `aps` object carries an `event` (`start`, `update`, or `end`), a `timestamp`, and a `content-state` that matches your activity's props. For the exact payload shape and headers, follow Apple's [Starting and updating Live Activities with ActivityKit push notifications](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/activitykit/starting-and-updating-live-activities-with-activitykit-push-notifications).

Reviewer 2: **[suggestion]** This sentence runs roughly 55 words across several nested parentheticals, which is hard to parse on first read (`style-guide.md#voice-and-tone`: one thought per sentence). Splitting the header requirements from the payload shape keeps each scannable.

```suggestion
Send the token to your server and use it to push updates. The notification must use the `liveactivity` push type (the `apns-push-type` header) and an `apns-topic` of `<your bundle identifier>.push-type.liveactivity`. Its `aps` payload carries an `event` (`start`, `update`, or `end`), a `timestamp`, and a `content-state` that matches your activity's props. For the exact payload shape and headers, follow Apple's [Starting and updating Live Activities with ActivityKit push notifications](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/activitykit/starting-and-updating-live-activities-with-activitykit-push-notifications).
```

## Known limitations

- **Widget refresh budget.** WidgetKit limits how often the system reloads a widget's timeline. A frequently viewed widget typically receives 40–70 refreshes per day (roughly one every 15–60 minutes), so widgets are not suited to second-by-second updates. Use Live Activities for real-time data.
- **Live Activity duration.** A Live Activity can stay active and receive updates for up to 8 hours, after which the system ends it and clears it from the Dynamic Island. It remains on the Lock Screen for up to 4 more hours (about 12 hours total) before the system removes it.
- **Frequent Live Activity updates.** To raise the budget for frequent push updates, set `NSSupportsLiveActivitiesFrequentUpdates` to `true` in your **Info.plist** (iOS 16.2 or later). The system may still throttle updates, and the user can disable frequent updates in Settings.

> - **Widget runtime.** Code inside a `'widget'`-marked component runs in an isolated runtime and can only use `@expo/ui/swift-ui` components — no React hooks, app state, or asynchronous work. See [The `'widget'` directive](#the-widget-directive).

Reviewer 2: **[nit]** Prefer a comma over an em dash here (`style-guide.md#punctuation`).

```suggestion
- **Widget runtime.** Code inside a `'widget'`-marked component runs in an isolated runtime and can only use `@expo/ui/swift-ui` components, with no React hooks, app state, or asynchronous work. See [The `'widget'` directive](#the-widget-directive).
```

      "title": "Delivery started",
      "body": "Your delivery is on the way"
    }
  }
}
```

Remote start requires iOS 17.2 or later. Include `input-push-token: 1` in the `aps` payload on iOS 18 or later if you want APNs to provide a new per-activity token for future updates.

To update a Live Activity remotely, send an `update` event to that activity's per-activity token:

```json
{
  "aps": {
    "timestamp": 1778832300,
    "event": "update",
    "content-state": {
      "name": "DeliveryActivity",
      "props": "{\"etaMinutes\":2,\"status\":\"Delivery arriving soon!\"}"
    }
  }
}
```

To end a Live Activity remotely, send an `end` event with the final content state:

```json
{
  "aps": {
    "timestamp": 1778832600,
    "event": "end",
    "content-state": {
      "name": "DeliveryActivity",
      "props": "{\"etaMinutes\":0,\"status\":\"Delivered\"}"
    },
    "dismissal-date": 1778833200
  }
}
```

For the exact payload shape and headers, follow Apple's [Starting and updating Live Activities with ActivityKit push notifications](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/activitykit/starting-and-updating-live-activities-with-activitykit-push-notifications).

> ## Known limitations

Reviewer 2: Please move this section before Installation. We display limitations for each library reference page before installation.

Author: Done! Thanks Aman
